docs/emod/malaria-model-infection-immunity.rst, before:

==================================
Malaria infection and immune model
==================================

To study aspects of malaria infections and population dynamics that do not fit into the framework of
a simple :term:`SEIRS model` with enhancements, |EMOD_s| contains a detailed :term:`microsolver`
using within-host parasite dynamics. In the microsolver, the development of clinical and
parasitological immunity is tracked through innate and adaptive immune responses to specific
antigens. A detailed parasite count over time is tracked for each infected individual. This permits
the simulation of measured prevalence over time by slide microscopy, RDTs (Rapid Diagnostic Tests)
or other diagnostics. Gametocyte production and decay is included to study the human infectious
reservoir.

Immune variables, such as antibody levels for each antigen, inflammatory :term:`cytokine` levels, and
immunological memory are represented by continuous floating-point variables. Most model parameters
have a specific physical interpretation and can be rationally constrained by defined experimental
measurements.


For a complete list of configuration parameters that are used in the malaria model, see the
:doc:`parameter-configuration`.


Within-host parasite dynamics
=============================

Within the microsolver framework, each new infection begins with a hepatic (liver-stage) latency of
fixed duration (7 days) and proceeds through cycles of asexual replication (with a fixed duration of
2 days) and :term:`gametocyte` production (which takes 10 days). The model accounts for several
antigenic components to which the immune system may develop immunity: the :term:`merozoite surface
protein (MSP)` variant, the :term:`Plasmodium falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein 1 (PfEMP1)`
presented on the surface of the infected red-blood cell (IRBC), and less immunogenic minor surface
epitopes (nonspecific epitopes).

.. figure:: ../images/vector-malaria/Malaria_Infection_within_host_parasite_dynamics.png

   Within-host dynamics



Gametocyte development
======================

The model advances gametocytes through five stages of development that are characterized by
different drug susceptibilities. A fraction of gametocytes die at each developmental stage, and
gametocytes can be inactivated by cytokines after uptake in a blood meal. Gametocytes reach maturity
after ten days and remain in the bloodstream with a 2.5-day half-life. |EMOD_s| does not model acquired
immunity to gametocytes.

.. figure:: ../images/vector-malaria/Malaria_Infection_gametocyte_development.png

   Gametocyte development



Modeling a single clonal infection
==================================

A single clonal infection is modeled with an antigenic repertoire of 50 unique PfEMP-1 variants
where each is associated with one of five repeating minor epitopes. In the first asexual cycle, the
first five variants are expressed in equal numbers. At each update, the immune system is stimulated
by the Infected Red Blood Cell (IRBC) count of each antigenic variant, and concurrently, the IRBC
counts are decremented on account of immune and drug killing effects.

At the end of each asexual cycle, the model calculates the fraction of merozoites (16 for each
previous IRBC) killed by specific recognition of the MSP variant, and the fraction that is
differentiated into male and female gametocytes. To capture the dynamics of the parasite’s immune
evasion strategy, the model imposes a constant per-parasite switching rate on the remaining
merozoites to advance to subsequent antigenic variants in the repertoire.

.. figure:: ../images/vector-malaria/Malaria_Infection_parasite_strain_switching.png

   Parasite strain switching



Population-level variants
-------------------------

The number of population-level variants affect the age-pattern of natural immunity acquisition. The
full set of population-level antigenic variants (out of which a single infection’s repertoire is
randomly drawn), consists of 100 MSP variants, 20 sets of five minor epitopes, and 1000 PfEMP-1
variants. Some parameters drive the asymptotic levels of adult detected parasitemia while others
primarily govern the transition between child and adult detected prevalence rates, and provide that
the number of PfEMP-1 variants is substantially more than an individual would experience in a year.
A multi-year burn-in period ensures immune initialization dynamics approximate long-term asymptotic
behavior where individuals in the simulation build antibody responses to a broad repertoire of
parasite antigens appropriate for their age.


Immune response to infection
============================

The immune response to infection is characterized by innate inflammatory and specific antibody
components that limit maximum parasite density and work to clear infection. As the antibody response
increases on a dimensionless scale from 0 to 1, the initial inflammatory response is suppressed.
After the antibody response appears, continued antigenic stimulation will drive up the adapted
response until that antigenic variant is cleared, at which point both the antibody levels and the
capacity to respond will decay over time.  The larger the antigenic population, the more infections,
and thus time, it takes to acquire broad parasitological immunity.

.. figure:: ../images/vector-malaria/Malaria_Infection_immunity_effects_on_course_of_infection.png

   Innate and adaptive immunity work together to limit asexual parasite numbers



Innate immune response
----------------------

The innate immune response is modeled to depend on a temporary contribution from a rupturing
:term:`schizont` at the end of each asexual cycle, as well as the concentration of IRBC surface
antigens to which an antibody response has not yet been developed. The innate response that is
suppressed by the presence of specific antibodies is responsible for driving febrile symptoms and
broad-spectrum parasite suppression.

.. figure:: ../images/vector-malaria/Malaria_Infection_immunity_innate_immune_response.png

   Innate immune response




Adaptive immune response
------------------------

The capacity to generate specific antibodies grows in response to the concentration of each novel
antigen. Above a capacity threshold level, antibodies are produced in increasing concentration until
the corresponding antigenic variant is cleared. At this time, the capacity will decay to a non-zero
memory level. The mechanism by which the antibody capacity evolves captures the time delay of
specific antibody response on re-infection.

.. figure:: ../images/vector-malaria/Malaria_Infection_immunity_adaptive_response_to_variable_epitopes.png

   Adaptive immune response to PfEMP1 and minor epitopes




.. figure:: ../images/vector-malaria/Malaria_Infection_immunity_anti_MSP_immunity.png

   Adaptive immune response to PfEMP1 and minor epitopesAdaptive immune response to MSP antigens





.. figure:: ../images/vector-malaria/Malaria_Infection_immunity_anti_CSP_immunity.png

   Adaptive immune response to CSP



Relevant IDM publications
=========================


Infection and immunity: Within-host parasite dynamics
-----------------------------------------------------

* Lawniczak & Eckhoff, 2016. `A computational lens for sexual-stage transmission, reproduction, fitness and kinetics in
  Plasmodium falciparum <http://malariajournal.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12936-016-1538-5>`__.
  *Malaria Journal*. 15:487

* Cameron, *et al*., 2015. `Defining the relationship between infection prevalence and clinical incidence of
  Plasmodium falciparum malaria <http://www.nature.com/articles/ncomms9170>`__. *Nature Communications*. 6:8170

* Ouedraogo, *et al*., 2015. `Dynamics of the Human Infectious Reservoir for Malaria Determined by Mosquito Feeding Assays and
  Ultrasensitive Malaria Diagnosis in Burkina Faso <https://academic.oup.com/jid/article-lookup/doi/10.1093/infdis/jiv370>`__.
  *Journal of Infectious Diseases*. 213(1):90-99

* Gerardin, Ouedraogo, McCarthy, Eckhoff and Wenger, 2015. `Characterization of the infectious reservoir of malaria
  with an agent-based model calibrated to age-stratified parasite densities and infectiousness
  <http://malariajournal.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12936-015-0751-y>`__. *Malaria Journal*. 14:231

* Eckhoff, 2012. `Malaria parasite diversity and transmission intensity affect development of parasitological
  immunity in a mathematical model <https://malariajournal.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1475-2875-11-419>`__.
  *Malaria Journal*. 11:419

* Eckhoff, 2012. `P. falciparum Infection Durations and Infectiousness Are Shaped by Antigenic Variation
  and Innate and Adaptive Host Immunity in a Mathematical Model <http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0044950>`__.
  *PLOS one*. 7(9)


Outcrossing of parasite genetics
--------------------------------

* Daniels, *et al*., 2015. `Modeling malaria genomics reveals transmission decline and rebound in Senegal
  <http://www.pnas.org/content/112/22/7067.full.pdf>`__. *PNAS*. 112(22):7067-7072


Interventions
-------------

* Eckhoff, Wenger, Godfray and Burt, 2016. `Impact of mosquito gene drive on malaria elimination in a computational model with
  explicit spatial and temporal dynamics <http://www.pnas.org/content/114/2/E255.full.pdf>`__. *PNAS*. 114(2)

Commit message:

more changes to support Antibody Long Term Decay

docs/emod/malaria-model-infection-immunity.rst, after:

==================================
Malaria infection and immune model
==================================

To study aspects of malaria infections and population dynamics that do not fit into the framework of
a simple :term:`SEIRS model` with enhancements, |EMOD_s| contains a detailed :term:`microsolver`
using within-host parasite dynamics. In the microsolver, the development of clinical and
parasitological immunity is tracked through innate and adaptive immune responses to specific
antigens. A detailed parasite count over time is tracked for each infected individual. This permits
the simulation of measured prevalence over time by slide microscopy, RDTs (Rapid Diagnostic Tests)
or other diagnostics. Gametocyte production and decay is included to study the human infectious
reservoir.

Immune variables, such as antibody levels for each antigen, inflammatory :term:`cytokine` levels, and
immunological memory are represented by continuous floating-point variables. Most model parameters
have a specific physical interpretation and can be rationally constrained by defined experimental
measurements.


For a complete list of configuration parameters that are used in the malaria model, see the
:doc:`parameter-configuration`.


Within-host parasite dynamics
=============================

Within the microsolver framework, each new infection begins with a hepatic (liver-stage) latency of
fixed duration (7 days) and proceeds through cycles of asexual replication (with a fixed duration of
2 days) and :term:`gametocyte` production (which takes 10 days). The model accounts for several
antigenic components to which the immune system may develop immunity: the :term:`merozoite surface
protein (MSP)` variant, the :term:`Plasmodium falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein 1 (PfEMP1)`
presented on the surface of the infected red-blood cell (IRBC), and less immunogenic minor surface
epitopes (nonspecific epitopes).

.. figure:: ../images/vector-malaria/Malaria_Infection_within_host_parasite_dynamics.png

   Within-host dynamics



Gametocyte development
======================

The model advances gametocytes through five stages of development that are characterized by
different drug susceptibilities. A fraction of gametocytes die at each developmental stage, and
gametocytes can be inactivated by cytokines after uptake in a blood meal. Gametocytes reach maturity
after ten days and remain in the bloodstream with a 2.5-day half-life. |EMOD_s| does not model acquired
immunity to gametocytes.

.. figure:: ../images/vector-malaria/Malaria_Infection_gametocyte_development.png

   Gametocyte development



Modeling a single clonal infection
==================================

A single clonal infection is modeled with an antigenic repertoire of 50 unique PfEMP-1 variants
where each is associated with one of five repeating minor epitopes. In the first asexual cycle, the
first five variants are expressed in equal numbers. At each update, the immune system is stimulated
by the Infected Red Blood Cell (IRBC) count of each antigenic variant, and concurrently, the IRBC
counts are decremented on account of immune and drug killing effects.

At the end of each asexual cycle, the model calculates the fraction of merozoites (16 for each
previous IRBC) killed by specific recognition of the MSP variant, and the fraction that is
differentiated into male and female gametocytes. To capture the dynamics of the parasite’s immune
evasion strategy, the model imposes a constant per-parasite switching rate on the remaining
merozoites to advance to subsequent antigenic variants in the repertoire.

.. figure:: ../images/vector-malaria/Malaria_Infection_parasite_strain_switching.png

   Parasite strain switching



Population-level variants
-------------------------

The number of population-level variants affect the age-pattern of natural immunity acquisition. The
full set of population-level antigenic variants (out of which a single infection’s repertoire is
randomly drawn), consists of 100 MSP variants, 20 sets of five minor epitopes, and 1000 PfEMP-1
variants. Some parameters drive the asymptotic levels of adult detected parasitemia while others
primarily govern the transition between child and adult detected prevalence rates, and provide that
the number of PfEMP-1 variants is substantially more than an individual would experience in a year.
A multi-year burn-in period ensures immune initialization dynamics approximate long-term asymptotic
behavior where individuals in the simulation build antibody responses to a broad repertoire of
parasite antigens appropriate for their age.


Immune response to infection
============================

The immune response to infection is characterized by innate inflammatory and specific antibody
components that limit maximum parasite density and work to clear infection. As the antibody response
increases on a dimensionless scale from 0 to 1, the initial inflammatory response is suppressed.
After the antibody response appears, continued antigenic stimulation will drive up the adapted
response until that antigenic variant is cleared, at which point both the antibody levels and the
capacity to respond will decay over time.  The larger the antigenic population, the more infections,
and thus time, it takes to acquire broad parasitological immunity.

.. figure:: ../images/vector-malaria/Malaria_Infection_immunity_effects_on_course_of_infection.png

   Innate and adaptive immunity work together to limit asexual parasite numbers



Innate immune response
----------------------

The innate immune response is modeled to depend on a temporary contribution from a rupturing
:term:`schizont` at the end of each asexual cycle, as well as the concentration of IRBC surface
antigens to which an antibody response has not yet been developed. The innate response that is
suppressed by the presence of specific antibodies is responsible for driving febrile symptoms and
broad-spectrum parasite suppression.

.. figure:: ../images/vector-malaria/Malaria_Infection_immunity_innate_immune_response.png

   Innate immune response




Adaptive immune response
------------------------

The capacity to generate specific antibodies grows in response to the concentration of each novel
antigen. Above a capacity threshold level, antibodies are produced in increasing concentration until
the corresponding antigenic variant is cleared. At this time, the capacity will decay to a non-zero
memory level. The mechanism by which the antibody capacity evolves captures the time delay of
specific antibody response on re-infection.

After a predefined numbers of days since the antibody has been active, we start "long term" decay
of the concentration.

.. figure:: ../images/vector-malaria/Malaria_Infection_immunity_adaptive_response_to_variable_epitopes.png

   Adaptive immune response to PfEMP1 and minor epitopes



.. figure:: ../images/vector-malaria/Malaria_Infection_immunity_anti_MSP_immunity.png

   Adaptive immune response to MSP antigens



.. figure:: ../images/vector-malaria/Malaria_Infection_immunity_anti_CSP_immunity.png

   Adaptive immune response to CSP




Relevant IDM publications
=========================


Infection and immunity: Within-host parasite dynamics
-----------------------------------------------------

* Lawniczak & Eckhoff, 2016. `A computational lens for sexual-stage transmission, reproduction, fitness and kinetics in
  Plasmodium falciparum <http://malariajournal.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12936-016-1538-5>`__.
  *Malaria Journal*. 15:487

* Cameron, *et al*., 2015. `Defining the relationship between infection prevalence and clinical incidence of
  Plasmodium falciparum malaria <http://www.nature.com/articles/ncomms9170>`__. *Nature Communications*. 6:8170

* Ouedraogo, *et al*., 2015. `Dynamics of the Human Infectious Reservoir for Malaria Determined by Mosquito Feeding Assays and
  Ultrasensitive Malaria Diagnosis in Burkina Faso <https://academic.oup.com/jid/article-lookup/doi/10.1093/infdis/jiv370>`__.
  *Journal of Infectious Diseases*. 213(1):90-99

* Gerardin, Ouedraogo, McCarthy, Eckhoff and Wenger, 2015. `Characterization of the infectious reservoir of malaria
  with an agent-based model calibrated to age-stratified parasite densities and infectiousness
  <http://malariajournal.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12936-015-0751-y>`__. *Malaria Journal*. 14:231

* Eckhoff, 2012. `Malaria parasite diversity and transmission intensity affect development of parasitological
  immunity in a mathematical model <https://malariajournal.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1475-2875-11-419>`__.
  *Malaria Journal*. 11:419

* Eckhoff, 2012. `P. falciparum Infection Durations and Infectiousness Are Shaped by Antigenic Variation
  and Innate and Adaptive Host Immunity in a Mathematical Model <http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0044950>`__.
  *PLOS one*. 7(9)


Outcrossing of parasite genetics
--------------------------------

* Daniels, *et al*., 2015. `Modeling malaria genomics reveals transmission decline and rebound in Senegal
  <http://www.pnas.org/content/112/22/7067.full.pdf>`__. *PNAS*. 112(22):7067-7072


Interventions
-------------

* Eckhoff, Wenger, Godfray and Burt, 2016. `Impact of mosquito gene drive on malaria elimination in a computational model with
  explicit spatial and temporal dynamics <http://www.pnas.org/content/114/2/E255.full.pdf>`__. *PNAS*. 114(2)
