docs/emod/parameter-campaign-node-inputeir.rst, before:

========
InputEIR
========

The **InputEIR** intervention class enables the Entomological Inoculation Rate (EIR) to be
configured for each month of the year in a particular node. The EIR is the number of infectious
mosquito bites received in a night. This number can be calculated by taking the number of mosquito
bites received  per night and multiplying them by the proportion of those bites that are positive
for sporozoites.

This intervention class can be used instead of including vectors in the model, as it will distribute
infections to people (it does not model vector biting). However, if vectors are  included when this
class is implemented, it will add the EIR specified for that month in addition to the EIR provided
by the vectors. Note that the Daily EIR channel in the :doc:`software-report-inset-chart` will not
be impacted by this intervention. When distributing **InputEIR** to a node that already has an existing
**InputEIR** intervention, the existing intervention of the same name will be purged and replaced
by the new one.



.. include:: ../reuse/warning-case.txt

.. include:: ../reuse/campaign-example-intro.txt

.. csv-table::
    :header: Parameter, Data type, Minimum, Maximum, Default, Description, Example
    :widths: 10, 5, 5, 5, 5, 20, 5
    :file: ../csv/campaign-inputeir.csv

.. literalinclude:: ../json/campaign-inputeir.json
   :language: json

Commit message:

support for changes in the InputEIR intervention.  (#54)
* updating intervention function and docs for updates in the InputEIR intervention in EMOD

docs/emod/parameter-campaign-node-inputeir.rst, after:

========
InputEIR
========

The **InputEIR** intervention class enables the Entomological Inoculation Rate (EIR) to be
configured either for each month or for each day of the year in a particular node. The EIR is the number of
infectious mosquito bites received in a night. This number is usually calculated by taking the number of mosquito
bites received  per night and multiplying them by the proportion of those bites that are positive for sporozoites.

The probability of an individual becoming infected from the each 'infectious bite' will be affected by
**Age_Dependent_Biting_Risk_Type** and **Enable_Demographics_Risk** settings, as well as any
**AcquisitionBlocking** vaccines that an individual may have received.

Vector control interventions will not affect the EIR delivered by this intervention.

If vectors are  included when this class is implemented, this will add the EIR specified for that month or day in
addition to the EIR provided by the vectors. Note that the **Daily EIR channel** in the :doc:`software-report-inset-chart`
will not be impacted by this intervention.

When distributing **InputEIR** to a node that already has an existing **InputEIR** intervention, the existing
intervention will be purged and replaced with the new intervention.

**Note**: **Age_Dependence** parameter has been removed from this intervention (EMOD v2.28, emod-malaria v0.77).
Age dependent biting risk is now controlled by the **Age_Dependent_Biting_Risk_Type parameter** in the config file, same as for vector biting.

.. include:: ../reuse/warning-case.txt

.. include:: ../reuse/campaign-example-intro.txt

.. csv-table::
    :header: Parameter, Data type, Minimum, Maximum, Default, Description, Example
    :widths: 10, 5, 5, 5, 5, 20, 5
    :file: ../csv/campaign-inputeir.csv

.. literalinclude:: ../json/campaign-inputeir.json
   :language: json
